doc/md/knowledge: added article "Partial Indexes in PostgreSQL" (#1148)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/knowledge/postgres/partial-indexes.md

---
id: partial-indexes
title: Partial Indexes in PostgreSQL
slug: /knowledge/postgres/partial-indexes
---

### Overview of Partial Indexes

#### What are Partial Indexes?

> With PostgreSQL we can create partial indexes to improve performance and reduce the cost, all while minimizing the amount of space used to store it on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With PostgreSQL, users may create partial indexes to improve performance and reduce the cost, all while minimizing the amount of space used to store it on disk.
```
I prefer a bit "drier" tone here. When we speak as we in the docsite we usually refer to ourselves (the atlas contributors etc).

> With PostgreSQL we can create partial indexes to improve performance and reduce the cost, all while minimizing the amount of space used to store it on disk.

Reviewer: Good suggestions. I would qualify the claim that partial indexes improve stuff (because they can make things worse)  `If used correctly, partial indexes..`

#### Why do we need them?

> Let’s demonstrate why partial indexes are useful by contrasting them with a non-partial index. ​​If you have a lot of records in an indexed table, the number of records the index needs to track also grows. If the index grows in size, the disk space needed to store the index itself increases as well. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s demonstrate a case where partial indexes may be useful by contrasting them with a non-partial index. ​​If you have a lot of records in an indexed table, the number of records the index needs to track also grows. If the index grows in size, the disk space needed to store the index itself increases as well. 
```

In many tables, different records are not accessed with uniform frequency. A subset of a table’s records might not be searched very frequently or not searched at all. Records take up precious space in your index whether they are queried or not. They are also updated when a new entry is added to the field.

> Partial indexes come into the picture to filter unsearched values and give you, as an engineer, a tool to index only what’s important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partial indexes come into the picture to filter unsearched values and give you, as an engineer, a tool to index only what's important.
```
@priteshtm  please make sure to use `'` and not `’` as an apostrophe (replace in other places, please)

:::info
You can learn more about partial indexes in PostgreSQL [here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/indexes-partial.html)
:::

#### Advantages of using Partial Indexes

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where we know ahead the access pattern to a table and can reduce the size of an index by making it partial:
```

> In cases where we know ahead the access pattern to a table and can reduce the size of an index by making it partial:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where we know ahead of time the access pattern to a table and can reduce the size of an index by making it partial:
```

> 1. Response time for SELECT operations is improved compared to databases that have non-partial index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Response time for SELECT operations is improved because the database searches through a smaller index.
```

2. On average, response time for UPDATE operations is also improved as the index is not going to get updated in all cases.

> 3. Index is smaller in size and can fit into memory more easily, saving space on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Index is smaller in size and can fit into RAM more easily. s
4. Less space is required to store the index on disk.
```

```sql
CREATE INDEX vaccinated_idx ON vaccination_data(vaccinated);
```
```console title="Output"
CREATE INDEX
Time: 333.891 ms
```

Now, let’s check the performance of querying data of doctors from India that have taken the vaccine with the following command:

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT  
        *
FROM    
        vaccination_data
WHERE
        vaccinated = 'Yes' AND country = 'India' AND title = 'Dr.';
```
```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                                                           
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Bitmap Heap Scan on vaccination_data  (cost=758.64..4053.40 rows=699 width=25) (actual time=4.142..16.212 rows=582 loops=1)
   Recheck Cond: ((vaccinated)::text = 'Yes'::text)
   Filter: (((country)::text = 'India'::text) AND ((title)::text = 'Dr.'::text))
   Rows Removed by Filter: 69334
   Heap Blocks: exact=1337
   ->  Bitmap Index Scan on vaccinated_idx  (cost=0.00..758.46 rows=69072 width=0) (actual time=3.940
..3.941 rows=69916 loops=1)
         Index Cond: ((vaccinated)::text = 'Yes'::text)
 Planning Time: 0.188 ms
 Execution Time: 16.292 ms
(9 rows)
```

:::info

> The EXPLAIN command is used for understanding the performance of a query. You can learn more about usage of EXPLAIN command with ANALYZE option [here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/using-explain.html#USING-EXPLAIN-ANALYZE)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The EXPLAIN command is used for understanding the performance of a query. You can learn more about usage of the EXPLAIN command with ANALYZE option [here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/using-explain.html#USING-EXPLAIN-ANALYZE)
```

:::

Notice that total Execution Time is 16.292ms. Also, let’s check the index size with the following command:

```sql
SELECT pg_size_pretty(pg_relation_size('vaccinated_idx'));
```
```console title="Output"
 pg_size_pretty 
----------------
 1984 kB
(1 row)
```

Now, suppose we want to accelerate the same query using the partial index. Let’s begin by dropping the existing index that we created earlier:

```sql
DROP INDEX vaccinated_idx;
```
```console title="Output"
DROP INDEX
Time: 7.183 ms
```

> In the following command, we have created an index with a WHERE clause that precisely describes list of doctors from India that have taken the vaccine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following command, we have created an index with a WHERE clause that precisely describes a list of doctors from India that have taken the vaccine.
```

```sql
CREATE 
    INDEX vaccinated_idx
ON 
    vaccination_data(vaccinated)
WHERE 
    vaccinated = 'Yes' AND country = 'India' AND title = 'Dr.';
```
```console title="Output"
CREATE INDEX
Time: 94.567 ms
```

Notice that the partial index with the WHERE clause is created in 94.567ms, compared to the 333.891ms taken for the non-partial index on the ‘vaccinated’ column.

> Let’s check the performance of querying list of doctors from India that have taken the vaccine again, using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s check the performance of querying a list of doctors from India that have taken the vaccine again, using the following command:
```

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT
        *
FROM    
        vaccination_data
WHERE
        vaccinated = 'Yes' AND country = 'India' AND title = 'Dr.';
```
```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                                                              
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Index Scan using vaccinated_idx on vaccination_data  (cost=0.15..1455.12 rows=699 width=25) (actual time=0.015..0.704 rows=582 loops=1)
 Planning Time: 0.442 ms
 Execution Time: 0.880 ms
(3 rows)
```

> Observe that total execution time has dropped significantly and is now only 0.880ms, compared to 16.292ms achieved by using a non-partial index on the ‘vaccinated’ column. Once again, let’s check the index size with the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Observe that the total execution time has dropped significantly and is now only 0.880ms, compared to 16.292ms achieved by using a non-partial index on the ‘vaccinated’ column. Once again, let’s check the index size with the following command:
```

 16 kB
(1 row)
```

As we can observe, the index size for the partial index takes significantly less space (16kb) compared to the non-partial index that we created earlier on the ‘vaccinated’ column (1984kb).

Here is a summary from our tests:

| Parameter                                    | Non-partial Index       | Partial Index           | Ratio of change(%) |
|:-------------------------------------------- |:----------------------- |:----------------------- |:------------------ |
| Estimated start-up cost                      | 758.64 arbitrary units  | 0.15 arbitrary units    | 99.9% reduced cost |
| Estimated total cost                         | 4053.40 arbitrary units | 1455.12 arbitrary units | 64.1% reduced cost |
| Time to create index                         | 333.891ms               | 94.567ms                | 71.6% less time    |
| Execution time for query with “WHERE” clause | 16.292ms                | 0.880ms                 | 94.5% less time    |
| Size of index                                | 1984kb                  | 16kb                    | 99.1% less space   |
(Note: The results will vary, ​​depending on the data that is stored in the database)

> We have seen that creating a partial index is a better choice where only a small subset of the values stored in the database are accessed frequently. Now, let’s see how we can easily manage partial indexes using Atlas in the following section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have seen that creating a partial index is a better choice where only a small subset of the values stored in the database are accessed frequently. Now, let’s see how we can easily manage partial indexes using Atlas.
```

### Managing Partial Indexes is easy with Atlas

Managing partial indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL is confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy to understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage partial indexes using Atlas.

:::info

> If you are just getting started, Install the latest version of Atlas using the Guide to [Setting Up Atlas](https://atlasgo.io/cli/getting-started/setting-up).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are just getting started, install the latest version of Atlas using the guide to [setting up Atlas](https://atlasgo.io/cli/getting-started/setting-up).
```

> Managing partial indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL is confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy to understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage partial indexes using Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing partial indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL can be confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy-to-understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage partial indexes using Atlas.
```

:::

#### Managing Partial Index in Atlas

We will first use the `atlas schema inspect` command to get an HCL representation of the table which we created earlier by using the Atlas CLI:

```console
atlas schema inspect -u "postgres://postgres:mysecretpassword@localhost:5432/vaccination_data?sslmode=disable" > schema.hcl
```
```hcl title="schema.hcl"
table "vaccination_data" {
  schema = schema.public
  column "id" {
    null = false
    type = serial
  }
  column "country" {
    null    = true
    type    = character_varying(20)
  }
  column "title" {
    null    = true
    type    = character_varying(10)
  }
  column "names" {
    null    = true
    type    = character_varying(20)
  }
  column "vaccinated" {
    null    = true
    type    = character_varying(3)
  }
  primary_key {
    columns = [column.id]
  }
}
schema "public" {
}
```

Now, lets add the following index definition to the file:

```hcl
  index "vaccinated_idx" {
    columns = [column.vaccinated]
    where   = "(vaccinated::text = 'Yes'::text AND country::text = 'India'::text AND title::text = 'Dr.'::text)"
  }
```

> Save and Apply the schema using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Save and apply the schema changes on the database by using the following command:
```

```console
atlas schema apply -u "postgres://postgres:mysecretpassword@localhost:5432/vaccination_data?sslmode=disable" -f schema.hcl
```

> Atlas quickly plans the necessary SQL to add the new partial index to the database schema for us and asks us to approve it. Press Enter while ‘Apply’ option is highlighted to apply the changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atlas generates the necessary SQL statements to add the new partial index to the database schema. Press Enter while the `Apply` option is highlighted to apply the changes:
```

```console
-- Planned Changes:
-- Create index "vaccinated_idx" to table: "vaccination_data"
CREATE INDEX "vaccinated_idx" ON "public"."vaccination_data" ("vaccinated") WHERE (vaccinated::text = 'Yes'::text AND country::text = 'India'::text AND title::text = 'Dr.'::text)
✔ Apply
  Abort
```

To verify that our new index was created, open the database command line tool from previous step and run:

```sql
SELECT
    indexname,
    indexdef
FROM
    pg_indexes
WHERE
    tablename = 'vaccination_data';
```
```console title="Output"
[ RECORD 1 ]
indexname | vaccinated_idx
indexdef  | CREATE INDEX vaccinated_idx ON public.vaccination_data USING btree (vaccinated) WHERE (((vaccinated)::text = 'Yes'::text) AND ((country)::text = 'India'::text) AND ((title)::text = 'Dr.'::text))
```

Amazing! Our new partial index is now created!

### Limitation of using Partial Index

If you are a new engineer working on an already existing, huge database and are not familiar with existing partial indexes or the nature of queries for such a database, you might end up using expensive queries. In these cases it’s easier to use non-partial index.

### Conclusion

> In this section, we learned about PostgreSQL partial indexes and how we can easily create partial indexes in a schema using Atlas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, we learned about PostgreSQL partial indexes and how we can easily create partial indexes in our database by using Atlas.
```

> If you are a new engineer working on an already existing, huge database and are not familiar with existing partial indexes or the nature of queries for such a database, you might end up using expensive queries. In these cases it's easier to use non-partial index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partial indexes are useful in cases where we know ahead of time that a table is most frequently queried with a certain `WHERE` clause.  As applications evolve, access patterns to the database also change. Consequently, we may find ourselves in a situation where our index no longer covers many queries, causing them to become resource consuming and slow.
```
